Create an AEP for table cleanup (#469)
astronomer/astro-sdk: docs/aep/AEP-2-table-cleanup.md

# AEP-2 Automatic Temporary Table cleanup

Authors:
* Daniel Imberman (daniel@astronomer.io)

## Status

| <!-- -->       |  <!-- -->                                                 |
| -------------- | --------------------------------------------------------- |
| **State**      | Accepted  |
| **Discussion** | https://github.com/astronomer/astro-sdk/issues/436                                      |
| **Created**    | 2022-06-05                                                |

## Motivation

> When running `aql.transform` or `aql.load_file` jobs, users will develop temporary tables in their databases every time they run a DAG. These extra tables are currently handled by placing all tables into a “temporary schema”. The thought behind these schemas is that a DBA can easily delete the schema if it starts to get full. This answer is insufficient so a better solution for table cleanup should be enacted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running `aql.transform` or `aql.load_file` jobs, the Astro SDK implicitly creates temporary tables in the database every time the DAG runs. These extra tables are currently handled by placing all tables into a “temporary schema”. The thought behind these schemas is that a DBA can easily delete the schema if it starts to get full. This answer is insufficient so a better solution for table cleanup should be enacted.
```

Reviewer: @dimberman Could you confirm in the code if we are always storing the tables in the temporary schema, or if there are times when we are actually storing them in the schema set in the connection?
This is the code I believe may be leading to this behaviour: https://github.com/astronomer/astro-sdk/blob/main/src/astro/databases/base.py#L148

Author: @tatiana if the user explicitly sets a schema in the connection then yes that will take precedence. This is by design (As we can't assume the same temp schema name across different databases). This also works perfectly with the cleanup step as once we set this up (and soon have a teardown step in the DAG), we won't need temporary schemas anyways.

* Requires some airflow knowledge (knowing that these callbacks exist)
* Callback logs are not easily viewable to users

### Option 3: a function with a table parameter

If we want FULL user transparency, we could offer a “cleanup” function that creates a task. It’s worth noting that as a task, there’s no implicit way to place this function at the end of the DAG, therefore we would ask users supply the tasks as function parameters s.t. We can clean the tasks at the end

```python
with dag:
    my_homes_table = aql.load_file(
        input_file=File(path=f"{s3_bucket}/homes.csv"),
        output_table=Table(
            conn_id="postgres_conn",
        ),
    )
    sample_table = sample_create_table(my_homes_table)
    df_res = my_df_func(sample_table)
    aql.cleanup(tables_to_cleanup=[my_homes_table, sample_table, df_res])
```
Pros:
* Requires no airflow knowledge
* Users can control when the temp tables are deleted. They can delete it after the end of a task(s) or at the end of DAG.
* Easy to debug, as tasks logs are accessible from the webserver as opposed to callbacks
* Allows using tasks trigger rules which gives control of running cleanup even when certain task fails

Cons:

> * If users add new tasks to the DAG, they need to remember to add it to the list

Reviewer: to the cleanup list

* It might find all tables and delete them before they necessarily SHOULD be deleted if the downstream tasks are not added to the dependencies list

### Option 4: a function with no parameters

```python
with dag:
    my_homes_table = aql.load_file(
        input_file=File(path=f"{s3_bucket}/homes.csv"),
        output_table=Table(
            conn_id="postgres_conn",
        ),
    )
    sample_table = sample_create_table(my_homes_table)
    df_res = my_df_func(sample_table)
    [my_homes_table, sample_table, df_res] >> aql.cleanup()
```

Pros:
* Would automatically find all tables
* Easy to debug, as tasks logs are accessible from the webserver as opposed to callbacks
* Allows using tasks trigger rules which gives control of running cleanup even when certain task fails

Cons:
* This ruins the feeling of the astro python SDK seeming “new”. We are exiting the functional paradigm and are now back in the land of bitshifting tasks.
* If users add new tasks to the DAG, they need to remember to add it to the list
* It might find all tables and delete them before they necessarily SHOULD be deleted if the downstream tasks are not added to the dependencies list

### Option 5: A listener

> We looked into using the new airflow listener feature for this feature, but unfortunately found it was not compatible. Even if it was, it would require

Reviewer: It may be worth adding a link and explaining why it is not compatible (ATM, in Airflow 2.3, listeners are at a task-level, and not at a DAG level)

asking users to install a custom plugin to their airflow instance which would add startup overhead.

### Option 6: An asynchronous task

One major issue with all task-based ideas is that we end up in a situation where the DAG becomes much harder to read (as there is a final task that is downstream of all tasks. This can create a lot of clutter

Where a DAG before might look like this:

![](img/AEP-2/example-dag.png)

The addition of the extra step adds a lot of complexity to the DAG shape:

![](img/AEP-2/example-with-downstream-cleanup.png)

Ideally we would like to have the transparency of a task, but without the extra logic or DAG structure complexity.

We believe that we can accomplish this using an asynchronous operator.

Using an asynchronous operator, we can create a task that does not NEED to run downstream of every other task. Instead this task can run in parallel, and only actually perform cleanups once every other task in the DAG has been accounted for (either passing, failing, or being skipped).

![](img/AEP-2/example-with-async-task.png)

> This structure will allow the DAG structure to remain relatively unchanged, keep additional code to a minimum for the DAG author AND allow users the ability to control if they only want certain tables deleted (e.g. if you give it a list of tasks it will only delete for those tasks, otherwise it will wait for all tasks to complete).

Reviewer 2: @dimberman How will the _cleanup task know what tables to delete and keep? will it be based on naming convention(_tmp<random_string>) or will it delete all tables?
